# Adding Externals Support (Devs)

!!! warning "For Developers of Pd Objects"
    This section is intended for those developing Pd objects and looking to add the object to `pd4web`. If this doesn't apply to you, feel free to skip this section.

## <h2 align="center"> **pd4web**: Adding Support to Externals </h2>

`pd4web` consists of a set of tools accessible via a Python module named pd4web. Internally, pd4web utilizes `EMSCRIPTEN` to compile external components into dynamic static libraries.

To integrate a new library, you must create a `CMakeLists.txt`. It's highly recommended to use [pd.cmake](https://github.com/pure-data/pd.cmake) due to assumptions made (such as the TARGET name convention like `earplug~` becoming `earplug_tilde` and others). After creating the `CMakeLists.txt` for the library you need, you can submit a PR that modifies `Externals.yaml` within `Sources/pd4web/Libraries`. In this file, simply add a new entry similar to the provided example. This will make the library compatible with `pd4web`. 

This is an example of how to define a library in the `Externals.yaml` file:

``` yaml

  - Name: cyclone # name of the pd library
    Source: GITHUB # source
    Developer: porres # in this case, Github user name
    Repository: pd-cyclone # in this case, Github Repo
    Version: cyclone_0.7-0 # version (tag name of stable commit hash)
```

Below the complete fields for enviroment.

<br>
<table class="special-table">
    <thead>
      <tr>
        <th>  Key Name  </th>
        <th>Description</th>
      </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><code>Name</code></td>
        <td>With name you specify the name of the library, for example <code>else</code>, <code>cyclone</code>, <code>timbreIdLib</code>.</td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
    
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><code>Developer</code></td>
        <td>The username of the user where the repository is hosted. For example <code>porres</code>.</td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
    
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><code>Repository</code></td>
        <td>The name of the repository where it is hosted. For example <code>pd-else</code>.</td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
    
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><code>Source</code></td>
        <td>The download source, it must be <code>GITHUB_RELEASES</code> or <code>GITHUB_TAGS</code>.</td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
    
  </table>

<br>



## Building the CmakeLists.txt

The `CMakeLists.txt` file is the most important file for the compilation of the external. It defines the external's name, the source files, and the dependencies. The following is an example of a `CMakeLists.txt` file for the `earplug~` library/object.

``` cmake
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.25)
project(earplug~)
set(LIB_DIR "${PD4WEB_EXTERNAL_DIR}/${PROJECT_NAME}")

pd_add_external(earplug~ "${LIB_DIR}/earplug.c")
```

Note that, `pd_add_external` is a function provided by the `pd.cmake` module. The first argument is the external's name, and the second argument is the source file. 

The `LIB_DIR` variable is used to define the external's directory. This directory will be `${PD4WEB_EXTERNAL_DIR}` followed by the library external name defined in the `Externals.yaml` file.

`PD4WEB_EXTERNAL_DIR` is a variable that points to the directory where the external's source files are located. It is defined in the `CMakeLists.txt` generated by `pd4web` (you don't need to define it).
